Title: TinyDB the NoSQL alternative to SQLlite
Date: 2016-12-22 08:30
Modified: 2016-12-22 08:30
Category: Python
Tags: Databases, NoSQL
Slug: tinydb-intro
Authors: TJ Nel
Summary: A Introduction to Tinydb the NoSQL alternative to SQLite for a Self-contained, File Based, Document Oriented database, thats really small!

### A introduction to Tinydb the NoSQL alternative to SQLite for a self contained, serverless database.

Let face it the future of the internet revolves around APIs, we are in a data-driven world and the format that we move this data is JSON. So it would be logical to have a database that speaks JSON and NoSQL database often provide a JSON like syntax that work well with this data.

__enter TinyDB...__

[TinyDB](https://tinydb.readthedocs.io) is a Document oriented NoSQL database that was written with only about 1200 lines of code! Just like with SQLite, TinyDB is great for quick and small scoped projects and testing. The database is stored in a .json file which as you guessed it is a simple json file that you can query later.Best of all it is written in good 'ole Python.

#### Example: Storing API Responses with TinyDB
In this example I am going to show you how to store a json formatted API response to a TinyDB databate. From there you can add, remove and modify entries within the database. 

#### Installing TinyDB
You can install TinyDB using PIP.
```python
pip install tinydb
```



#### Using TinyDB

Just like with any other python module you can import TinyDB but it is best practice to import the submodules TinyDB and Query (see below).
```python
from tinydb import TinyDB, Query
```
Then you will need to create a database object
```python
db = TinyDB('dbname.json')
```

After that you are all set, just work directly with the database object you just created.
#### Setting up your API Call
For this example we will be using the People In Space API available from [Open Notify](http://open-notify.org/Open-Notify-API/People-In-Space/). This API return a list of all of the members currently on the International Space Station. To use this API you need to sent a HTTP request to __http://api.open-notify.org/astros.json__ with no authentication or parameters required and you will get back a JSON formatted response with all of the current astronauts on the ISS. So in python the request to get the JSON back looks like this...
```python
import requests
response = requests.get("http://api.open-notify.org/astros.json")
data = response.json()
```

So if we print data we should get the following output:
```python
print(data)
```
>{'number': 6, 'people': [{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Sergey Rizhikov'}, {'craft': >'ISS', 'name': 'Andrey Borisenko'}, {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Shane Kimbrough'}, {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Oleg Novitskiy'}, {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Thomas Pesquet'}, {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Peggy Whitson'}], 'message': 'success'}

#### Adding API Call Results to TinyDB
Now we want to put the people from that JSON response into a TinyDB database. So to do  this we need to learn how to add a entry into a TinyDB database. TinyDB has a couple of functions that allow you to modify the database file you are working with. 

__Inserting Data__

To insert or add data into your database you would use ```db.insert(...)``` 

__Updating Data__

To update information in your database you would use ```db.update(fields, query)``` this works by updating all elements matching the query with fields.

Right now we want to add every entry from the list of people in space so we will be using insert. So if we wanted to add the Sergey Rizhikov from the data above we would use the syntax ```db.insert({'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Sergey Rizhikov'})```.  But we dont want to copy-paste every person in space, so iterating through the people section of the JSON output and putting that into the ```db.insert()``` statement using the below code should populate our database.
```python
for person in data['people']:
    db.insert(person)
```

and using ```db.all()``` which prints out the contents of your tiny database confirms the people were inserted into the database.
```python
db.all()
```
>{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Sergey Rizhikov'}
{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Andrey Borisenko'}
{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Shane Kimbrough'}
{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Oleg Novitskiy'}
{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Thomas Pesquet'}
{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Peggy Whitson'}
#### Querying the Database
Now that we have data in our database, it would be useful to be able to retieve from it. TinyDB allows you to query that data by using a Query() object. So if you wanted to get a list of all the people in space on the ISS you can use this code:
```python
Astro = Query()
db.search(Astro.craft == 'ISS')
```
Unsuprisingly you will get all of the entries put in with ISS as the craft (which is all of them). But what if you wanted to search for a speciifc person like Peggy? Well you could you use this code:
```python
db.search(Astro.name.search('Peggy'))
```
Which will return only people with Peggy in their name
>[{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Peggy Whitson'}]

Modifying the code to search for anyone with ```'Pe'``` in their name with this syntax ```db.search(Astro.name.search('Pe'))``` returns the following:
>[{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Thomas Pesquet'},
 {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Peggy Whitson'}]
 
#### Updating the fields in the Database
Now what if one of the people in space changes the craft they are on from the ISS to Tiangong 1 (We will call it T1) we can update their data by following the syntax we previously talked about. So lets send Peggy Whitson to T1.
```python
db.update({'craft':'T1'}, Astro.name.search('Peggy') )
```
Now checking ```db.all()``` you should now see Peggy on the T1 craft.
>[{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Sergey Rizhikov'},
 {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Andrey Borisenko'},
 {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Shane Kimbrough'},
 {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Oleg Novitskiy'},
 {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Thomas Pesquet'},
 {'craft': 'T1', 'name': 'Peggy Whitson'}]

#### Removing Data from the Database
Lets now send someone home, TinyDB allows you to remove entries in the database using ```db.remove()``` where it will remove all of the entries matching the query placed inside of the parenthesis. Lets send Shane home and remove him from the database with the following code:
```python
db.remove(Astro.name.search('Shane'))
```
Now checking ```db.all()``` we see that Shane is no longer in the database output.
>[{'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Sergey Rizhikov'},
 {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Andrey Borisenko'},
 {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Oleg Novitskiy'},
 {'craft': 'ISS', 'name': 'Thomas Pesquet'},
 {'craft': 'T1', 'name': 'Peggy Whitson'}]

#### Clearing the database

Last but not least if you want to clear out the database you can just run ```db.purge()``` and you will have a nice and empty database to work with. 
 
 __For more TinyDB info:__

- [https://tinydb.readthedocs.io](https://tinydb.readthedocs.io)
 
- [https://github.com/msiemens/tinydb](https://github.com/msiemens/tinydb)

- [https://pypi.python.org/pypi/tinydb](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/tinydb)
